---
layout: post

title: FDA Tainted Products Marketed as Dietary Supplements History
description: Based on FDA's alert to the public on potential hidden ingredients in tainted food products

author: Ruojing Liu
email: angus.liu@u.northwestern.edu
twitter: rj_liu
---

## FDA Tainted Products Marketed as Dietary Supplements History

In general, health fraud drug products are items usually labeled or merketed as dietary supplements that claim to treat disease or improve health.

Besides waisting customers' money, these products sometimes contain hidden drug ingredients which could be potentially harmful to human body when taken unknowingly without physicians' instructions.Health fraud scams waste money and can lead to delays in getting proper diagnosis and treatment. They can also cause serious or even fatal injuries.

After anayzing <a href="http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/sda/sdnavigation.cfm?sd=tainted_supplements_cder">public warning data released by FDA</a>, it is obvious that most of these tainted "foods" found by FDA are often promoted for sexual enhancement, weight loss, and body building.
<iframe width="600" height="371" seamless frameborder="0" scrolling="no" src="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1M-AHZHA6tvS9WYMejMlwRqIfcgCssjxLlTTXxiZF1Ec/pubchart?oid=921097478&amp;format=interactive"></iframe>

Among the most common hidden ingredients found in these products are sibutramine, sildenafil and a structural analog of sildenafil -- sulfoaidenafil. Sildenafil, the active ingredient used in the FDA-approved prescription drug under brand names Viagra and Revatio, treatments for erectile dysfunction. The ingredient may interact with nitrates usually found in drugs for people with diabetes, high blood pressure, high cholesterol or heart disease. Taken in combination, they could lower blood pressure to dangerous levels. 

<a href="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1M-AHZHA6tvS9WYMejMlwRqIfcgCssjxLlTTXxiZF1Ec/edit?usp=sharing">The google sheet analyzing the data.</a>
