---
layout: post

title: Data Visualization Examples -- Good vs Bad
description: Analysis on one good and one bad data visulization examples

author: Ruojing Liu
email: angus.liu@u.northwestern.edu
twitter: rj_liu
---

## Data Visualization Examples: Good vs. Bad

Good
<a href="https://www.washingtonpost.com/graphics/national/mass-shootings-in-america/?%3Ftid%3D=sm_pg">The math of mass shootings</a>

This piece looks at numbers of the deadliest mass shootings in the U.S. from 1966, including victims, weapons and locations. 

WP creates human body shapes to represent the victims, with different postures that could be easily identified as someone of a particular age group and gender. For example, a shape of someone with long hair, wearing heels while holding a book as a girl/woman at the age of 16 to 19. It then accentuates those under the age of 20 by darkening the color of the shapes.

Using monochromatic human body shapes instead of individual pictures keeps the piece clean and avoids the awkwardness of trying to show people without an available picture. Emphasizing those young deaths makes the visualization aesthetically more diverse – instead of making all shapes in the exact same color which will be giving the readers a hard time to decide where to go first, while also fits the common understanding of the gravity of these deaths.

The graph shows the reader which individual you’re looking at by making that shape purple, and at the same time, making people died in the same incident even darker. Here, I would not criticize WP’s decision to scatter people died in the same incident instead of putting them together in just one place. I think this decision works for this piece in the sense that 1) these victims are usually random people we would meet on the street, scattering them on the map resonates this atmosphere of everyday-like feeling; 2) it makes the piece aesthetically more appealing and more large-scaled because sometimes, e.g. a shooting at a school, we would have the same shape clustered together if we decide to put them in accordance with the incident; 3) the purpose of this piece is not to look at one particular incident, it is meant for the reader to hover around and explore a little bit on themselves; 4) it also provides those readers who want to follow one incident the option to, because even though those people are scattered, they’re not very far away from each other, you can easily identify them one by one.

Showing each incident as a colored circle on a map with the size of the circles in accordance with the size of casualty is also an efficient way to summarize and visualize those shootings.

The last part showing there’s no comprehensive data to calculate mass shootings incorporates the data needed – killed and injured – into very simple and easy-to-understand graphs. One can easily see the difference that there’re different numbers of red and grey columns in different databases for the same time period. And even for one infamous incident – Virginia Tech – casualties are calculated differently.

Not Exactly
<a href="http://datanews.caixin.com/2016/home_en/">China’s Property Market Report – A Decade of Ups and Downs</a>

First, the front page. It all looks very nice, with the panorama of a cartooned city as the background, and then it doesn’t take no effort to figure out how to scroll down. The grey moving button in the middle which I think is supposed to be a mouse is just distracting -- it takes one’s first instinct to know to use the wheel on a mouse to scroll down. And the page dots on the far right where you can click on to change the page are buried so perfectly into the background building.

And that moving map: 1) the color palette of the first map just throws me off -- that light blue and red and the sharp blue indicating the city you’re hovering over; 2) you have to move your mouse with the map so that the focus doesn’t slip to another city as the map turns, and you can’t clip the city on the map but have to choose from a drop-down menu on the right, and be careful not to let your mouse scroll back to the map because it will overrule the selection on the menu; 3) the names of the cities look awkward as they always face the same direction relative to the map; 4) no explanation of the term of the white line in the graph, “Avg. home price,” is it the average of the entire country or of all the cities selected, and how are those cities selected anyway? 5) you have to wait until the beige-colored bar in the graph move toward the end, you can pause it when it gets there, but cannot drag it to a particular time when it’s on the move.

The color blocks summarizing the map is just super crowded and looks like some kind of malfunction at first glance. At least I’m glad the bar will be enlarged and the city on the left be reddened once you’ve hovered over a particular city.

The last part of the piece is the most successful part, it uses a simple graph to tell the readers how long it takes for a family with per capita dispensable income to purchase an 80 sq. meters flat in each city. You can type in your family monthly income if you want to get a personal calculation and compare it with the city’s average in terms of time needed to buy that flat. It is much easier to understand.
