---
layout: post

title: Week 3 - Finding the most expensive hospitals for the elderlies in the U.S.
description: Based on FY2014 inpatient charge data from the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services

author: Ruojing Liu
email: angus.liu@u.northwestern.edu
twitter: @rj_liu
---

## Finding the most expensive hospitals for the elderlies in the U.S.

This is a report based on the inpatient charge data released by the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) for fiscal year 2014. The data provided include hospital-specific costs based on a rate per discharge using the Medicare Severity Diagnosis Related Group (MS-DRG). More than 3,000 U.S. hospitals that receive Medicare Inpatient Prospective Payment System (IPPS) payments are included. Data was suppressed if a provider had 10 or fewer discharges for a particular DRG.

Here in this analysis, I try to look at the total payment amount that according to CMS includes the MS-DRG amount, bill total per diem, beneficiary primary payer claim payment amount, beneficiary Part A coinsurance amount, beneficiary deductible amount, beneficiary blood deducible amount and DRG outlier amount. In short, the payments are what Medicare and the patients paid for inpatient stays.

According to this dataset, in FY2014, 459,510 inpatients with a diagnosis of "major joint replacement or reattachment of lower extremity without major complication or comorbidity (MCC)" were discharged from those hospitals, making the diagnosis group the largest among all 742 diagnosis categories. "Septicemia or severe sepsis without mechanically ventilated (MV) 96+ hours with MCC" and "heart failure & shock with MCC", with total discharges of 439,920 and 210,431 respectively, rank second and third.

The most expensive inpatient experience in terms of total payments is "heart transplant or implant of heart assist system with MCC," with an average total payments of more than $252,000 for all 1,822 discharges nationwide.

For the joint replacement category, California discharged the largest amount of cases of 32,930 in the largest number of hospitals -- 236 – that provided such service, and Florida's 31,086 cases makes its patient base second largest.

The most expensive hospital treating this diagnosis is the Summa Health Systems Hospitals in Akron, Ohio. For 20 cases it discharged in FY2014, the average total payment was soaring at more than $61,000, the only one that needs an average total payment of more than $45,000 for this diagnosis group. The University of Cincinnati Medical Center is the second most expensive hospital treating inpatients of this diagnosis in the same state of Ohio, but patients and Medicare only need to pay about $21,000 for the same procedure, nearly a third of Summa’s price.

When we look at the average payment level of an entire state, Maryland ranks the most expensive state treating major joint replacement, with a state average of $23,672; Alaska, with an average total payment of $22,867 ranks second. California ranks fifth within this category, patients and Medicare were paying slightly less than $19,000 for each case. Alabama hospitals, on average, charged their patients the least at a rate of $11,874.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/LwuDp2v7SpM" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

<iframe src="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1fdXkppu2L-xzmWWp8YCv-omiXcS2rkXXsSsyyK4hNd8/pubchart?oid=1703356044&amp;format=interactive"></iframe>
